Planning for the DCP (#69)
HumanCellAtlas/dcp-community: rfcs/text/0000-planning-for-the-dcp.md

One of the **challenges** facing the DCP as it matures was identified in this [Update from HCA Science Governance](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/13hZ7vmr371mN1YFjFyDN-6c0Ul95NwiJcVsjA3nJFVE/edit#slide=id.p3):

> "A lack of reproducible planning process that prioritizes deliverables and ensures confidence that they will meet the needs of HCA"

### DCP _data as a service_

As a starting point, DCP should think *outside-the-box* and adopt one of the [principles of LeSS](https://less.works/less/principles/whole-product-focus.html) 
>"Customers don’t buy a part of the product, but the whole product … there is no value in separate parts or half-working parts."

Historically, ownership of the DCP software has been distributed across our canonical architectural diagram with its colorful *think-inside-the-boxes* (components). As a result, DCP planning and development have also been distributed to a high degree, resulting in questions or confusion about DCP priorities relative to component priorities with a subsequent lack of alignment for delivery of product increments, unless externally imposed by requests from HCA Science Governance. 

> For example, how does a developer know whether to prioritize research for an operational scoping task assigned by **Technical Architecture**, collaborate on a cross-component RFC surfaced at a DCP quarterly meeting, or develop a component-specific feature? 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, how does a developer know whether to prioritize research for an operational scoping task assigned by the [Architecture Team](https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/dcp-community/blob/master/charters/Architecture/charter.md) collaborate on a cross-component RFC surfaced at a DCP quarterly meeting, or develop a component-specific feature? 
```

> For example, how does a developer know whether to prioritize research for an operational scoping task assigned by **Technical Architecture**, collaborate on a cross-component RFC surfaced at a DCP quarterly meeting, or develop a component-specific feature? 

Reviewer 2: It's not clear to me from the rest of the proposal that this particular motivation is addressed. For example at a DCP wide level, if an operational scoping task is defined as the main priority in the product backlog what autonomy does a component have to ignore this task if they believe it doesn't affect them, or should they work on the task regardless?

Author: An _operational scoping task_ in the _dcp_ repo is a spike to understand the requirements for an operational epic which could be blocking General Availability. It needs to occur before issues can be created in component repo(s). I'm not sure why such a spike would be assigned to a shepherd on a team  _if they believe it doesn't affect them_.

> To best serve our users and address the concerns of HCA Science Governance, our plans must focus on the needs and priorities of DCP *data as a service* rather than the individual *Chartreuse* or *Polka Dot* components. This requires a DCP-wide project management process with clear priorities and product increments delivered on a regular cadence. 

Reviewer: Consider rephrasing the first sentence here. Since we are moving away from "colored boxes," references to colored components will be confusing to uninitiated readers.

## Scientific "guardrails" 

> As key stackholders, the *Oversight Committee* MUST attend Sprint Reviews on a quarterly basis to offer feedback. 

Reviewer 3: OC is not really attending "Sprint Reviews" since those occur at 4 week intervals. Maybe call these "Quarterly Product Reviews"?

Author: There was a side discussion with John Marioni and the Project Leads at the DCP F2F. There was general agreement that *Oversight* would attend every third sprint review which would be **special**. I agree that this needs to be clarified in the absence of discussions about _Releases_ in this RFC. Still debating whether to add that section in the absence of a Roadmap RFC to anchor it to ...

Author: For the moment, I will not address or resolve this comment further. I'd like to encourage broader discussion about whether we propose a separate quarterly review with _Oversight_ to feature **highlights** from the last three Sprints.

Reviewer 4: I would suggest that highlights from the last three sprints seems more useful for the Oversight group than just what happened in the last sprint otherwise we risk saving demoing of the things which TechArch view are most valuable to Oversight to the meetings they attend.

Also, when stating they must attend, do we have a sense of quorate for their attendance, I doubt we will always get all of them

> As key stackholders, the *Oversight Committee* MUST attend Sprint Reviews on a quarterly basis to offer feedback. 

Reviewer 5: `stackholder` -> `stakeholder`

Author: Good catch. Corrected in my editor's draft.

## Detailed Design or _Scrum meets ZenHub_

### **!** Scrum

A single agile framework (referenced as **!** **Scrum**) MUST be used by all component teams for planning and developing DCP *data as a service* in an iterative, incremental manner.

Based on the broad adoption of Scrum variations across the DCP community, the expectation is that the reader is familiar with this framework and its artifacts. If not, please review the [definitive reference](https://scrumguides.org/docs/scrumguide/v2017/2017-Scrum-Guide-US.pdf) before proceeding.

Exceptions to Scrum (colloquially known as [ScrumButs](https://www.scrum.org/resources/what-scrumbut) in that community) are described below. 

As identified by charters, the DCP **Product Owners** (with guidance from **UXR**) are the **!** **Scrum** Product Owners in violation of Scrum’s *"the product owner is one person, not a committee"*.)

> There is also no formal DCP **Scrum Master**.

Reviewer 6: I think that this will be a difficult ScrumBut to ameliorate. We might think of having a quarterly role of "ringmaster" or "benevolent overlord" who is responsible for driving loose consensus on the priorities and ordering the backlog.

Author: I raised this in an email to the DCP product owners in January. The consensus was for small group over a quarterly product owner. But we could certainly revisit through the retrospective process. I also believe that a DCP roadmap (in progress) would define the priorities for ordering the backlog. And the process also encourages more conversations between component teams.

> ### ZenHub

Reviewer: We should make it clear to the uninitiated what functional aspect of project management we are talking about.

```suggestion
### Task Tracking
```

Author: I would describe it more as a project management application. It's not limited to task tracking since we also use it for prioritization, reporting, etc.  This would echo the line in the **Summary**:  

> This RFC adopts and formalizes existing best project management practices and applications

> [ZenHub](https://www.zenhub.com/) has been partially adopted in the DCP community. This proposal commits the community to validating whether ZenHub can become our *one source of truth* for project management. If not, then it should be replaced with a more suitable alternative.

Reviewer: This seems like a meta-conversation about what the RFC review process will mean for the team. This will be confusing to future readers. I'd just state what the desired change is.

```suggestion
[ZenHub](https://www.zenhub.com/) is our task tracker and *source of truth* for project management.
```

That the team can propose viable alternatives is implicit in the RFC review process.

Author: I can understand the confusion. I was not expecting that we would revisit the selection of ZenHub during the RFC review (which is why I'm provided historical context for its inclusion in the RFC). But then, the reference to _replaced with a more suitable alternative_ - probably belongs in the Retrospective (as an example) or in the Acceptance Criteria.

DCP SHOULD NOT duplicate the ZenHub DCP board in other documents or spreadsheets. The board and its reports represent the definitive list of DCP prioritized tasks (Product Backlog) and their state.

> ### ! Scrum → ZenHub Secret Decoder Ring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### ! Scrum → ZenHub Secret Decoder Ring
```
Sub-section of the `Task Tracking` section.

* Backlog items → Issues with User Stories
* Spikes → Issues with a "Spike" GitHub label
* Epics → Epics
* Sprint → Milestone

> * Product backlog → Issues without a Milestone in the *Product Backlog* pipeline

Reviewer 3: Capitalize first instance of "backlog"?

Author: Updated in my editor's draft.

* Sprint Backlog → Issues with a Milestone in the *Sprint Backlog* pipeline

### DCP Product Backlog

The DCP ZenHub board is the ordered **!** **Scrum** Product Backlog for DCP. 

> The top-level *dcp* repo MUST contain **all** significant features that are important to the DCP community as a whole and require visibility and prioritization. This includes  issues or epics describing user features or product-wide technical requirements (e.g. “components should have logs...“). 

Reviewer 2: If a feature (feature x) is considered significant for a specific component and placed in the DCP wide backlog for visibility but is subsequently deprioritised compared to other tasks in the DCP wide backlog, does this mean that the proposing component should not work on feature x?
For example ingest has been working on metadata schema for imaging data as this will block downstream components.  Individual components currently have autonomy to address early phase issues such as this and I'm not sure how these would be addressed in future.
If a component recognises that a feature is important, how do they build consensus for the prioritisation of this feature or task when it only affects once component?

Author: _If a component recognises that a feature is important, how do they build consensus for the prioritisation of this feature or task when it only affects once component?_

That would be the roadmap process. Note that the DCP _dcp_ repo represents both cross-component epics and _significant features_ which is why there is an epic related to the next version of the Expression Matrix Service API.

I would expect to have reasonable conversations during _Refinement_ sessions.  Assuming that we have quarterly priorities from the DCP roadmap, then the conversation would be about whether Ingest is focused on the highest priority items in the DCP product backlog. 

Also see my [response](https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/dcp-community/pull/69#discussion_r264932722) to Justin.

All component repos that will assign items to a DCP Milestone MUST be added to the ZenHub *DCP Backlogs* workspace.

DCP Product Backlog items  are modeled as:
- [User Stories](http://agiledictionary.com/277/user-story/) with acceptance criteria
- [Epics](http://agiledictionary.com/309/epic/) contain a related set of smaller User Stories required to complete an objective.
- [Spikes](http://agiledictionary.com/209/spike/) adopted from eXtreme Programming to answer design questions.
  - [Example use in the Scaled Agile Framework](https://www.scaledagileframework.com/spikes/)

#### User Stories

The [*researcher with a keyboard*](https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/1Li9o_uVkEZDZHbkQv86I49FG8I0zGSgHYkKabp7piEs/edit) and [*researcher with a pipette*](https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/1o6I5BLtJuRJ1vUdb7dHCkFbo0XiaxKDBiVAogqnUowU/edit) journeys are the initial source of user stories that  are modeled as epics in the *dcp* repo,  reflecting the narrative flow of the product. Further refinement by the Product Owners is required to both develop and  extend the high-level set of user activities. 

> Since journeys may vary per persona personas MUST be identified for an epic by assigning a documented GitHub label such as "keyboard", "pipette", or "road-builder".  An epic MAY support multiple personas.

Reviewer 3: "road-builder" is not defined (unlike user-with-a-pipette/keyboard) and I'd suggest a less-obfuscating term such as "analysis/external application developer".

Author: It was referenced in [Focus personas - overview](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1HDV1O2Jl_9LaLAK3zoPb15XSTJb4m0yuPt1oHr2Hs6c/edit) - _The Analysis Road Builder - a developer building analysis tools or portals for others to use_ It's also part of the Beta 2 Research Plan.

#### Technical and Operational Requirements

> Product-wide technical or operational requirements are defined by **Technical Architecture** and modeled as epics in the *dcp* repo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Product-wide technical or operational requirements are defined by the Architecture Team and modeled as epics in the *dcp* repo.
```

#### Owners

> A DCP owner MUST be assigned to each issue or epic in the *Product Backlog* in the *dcp* repo to shepherd and coordinate progress. This owner is responsible for ensuring that related issues are created in component repo(s) and linked to epics in the *dcp* repo.

Reviewer 6: What do you think of changing this to require an owner for an epic to transition to the "Sprint Backlog" pipeline, but not for every epic in the backlog? If the backlog is long then we could have epics sufficiently far away, and vague enough to not have an owner yet. They may require a spike for clarification first. "Support for big 'R' data release" might be a good example of this.

Author: We have _Icebox_ for future, ambiguous issues that do not require a shepherd yet - but I would suggest that it's critical to have an assigned shepherd for all Product Backlog items to ensure that they're being refined and progressing towards the Sprint Backlog.

For example, an implementation task for a specific component resides in its own ZenHub repo and is linked to the relevant epic in the *dcp* repo.

* No component-specific GitHub labels such as "Data Store" MUST be assigned to an epic in the *dcp* repo. The link documents the relationship.

### Sprints

 **Four week sprints**. There MUST be one DCP Sprint and Sprint Backlog, not a separate Sprint and Sprint Backlog for each component team. Each DCP Sprint starts on Thursday and ends on Wednesday.  
 
Each Sprint MUST be assigned a ZenHub *Milestone* with a due date by the **Product Owners**.

 All Scrum events are scheduled on the DCP calendar at a regular cadence. For example:
![](../images/0000-scrum-calendar.png)

> ### Refinement

Reviewer: This section was very hard for me to parse. I'd hit some very basic points in the first couple sentences and then unroll notes, questions, and details after the fact:

1. What are the goals of a refinement meeting?
1. Who attends?
1. How often?
1. Details, FAQ
1. Supporting historical info, notes

Author: @mweiden - I restructured this section as a first pass. I plan to review further, but please let me now if it is easier to _parse_.

New items appear in the ZenHub *New* pipeline and must be triaged into the *Product Backlog* pipeline, the *Icebox* pipeline, or the *Closed* pipeline.

> **NOTE**: *To avoid maintenance overhead due to duplicate or incomplete issues, the creation of new items SHOULD be limited to **DCP PM** or a facilitator from **Technical Architecture**.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**NOTE**: *To avoid maintenance overhead due to duplicate or incomplete issues, the creation of new items SHOULD be limited to **DCP PM** or a facilitator from the Architecture Team.
```

Reviewer: Also: this and the previous line probably belong in the `DCP Product Backlog` section.

The ZenHub *Product Backlog* pipeline is the DCP product backlog which is ordered during Refinement.

The ZenHub *Icebox* pipeline SHOULD be used with great constraint in the *dcp* repo. It's not a pipeline for avoiding hard decisions during Refinement. It's intended to document potential *futures* from the DCP roadmap. Individual component repo(s) MAY use the *Icebox* pipeline in a manner of their own choosing.

> ***QUESTION**: During the PM whiteboard session, there was agreement that dcp Epics would follow the normal pipeline lifecycle. Is this still true?*

Reviewer 3: Agree.

Reviewer 6: Agree

> No issues in the *dcp* repo MUST be assigned to the *Epic* pipeline. It will also be hidden in the dashboard. Individual component repo(s) MAY use the *Epic* pipeline in a manner of their own choosing.

Reviewer: For clarity/readability, I would just state the desired process and eschew the historical bits.

Author: If you are referring to the ***QUESTION*** section, it was a temporary _look at this!_ note for the review by product owners. We agreed to one approach during the PM meeting, but I felt that there was potential _drift_ during later triage sessions. Removing now that there's confirmation of our original approach.

Reviewer: I think you could also put questions on the PR itself. That's probably where the meta-discussion belongs.

### Sprint Planning

Prior to the start of the DCP Sprint, component teams identify their *Sprint Backlog* - a slice of items from the the ZenHub *Product Backlog* pipeline in their repo which are assigned to the ZenHub Milestone for the Sprint and moved to the ZenHub *Sprint Backlog* pipeline.

The number of items selected is solely up to the Development Team. 
- [ZenHub story points](https://help.zenhub.com/support/solutions/articles/43000034282) MUST be assigned to all *Sprint Backlog* items. (Story points are required to enable [ZenHub burndown charts](https://help.zenhub.com/support/solutions/articles/43000010356-track-sprint-progress-with-burndown-charts) to track the progress of a Sprint.)
  - [How to start?](https://www.scrum.org/forum/scrum-forum/6774/how-decide-how-many-story-points-take-first-sprint)
- Research and prototyping tasks SHOULD be modeled as Spikes.
- Dependencies between components within a Sprint MUST be communicated between the respective teams and surfaced using [ZenHub Dependencies](https://help.zenhub.com/support/solutions/articles/43000010349). 

> At the start of the Sprint, the single DCP Sprint Backlog can be reviewed by **PM** and **Technical Architecture** in their oversight roles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the start of the Sprint, the single DCP Sprint Backlog can be reviewed by **PM** and the Architecture Team. in their oversight roles.
```

### Sprint(ing)

During Development, individual developers assign items from the ZenHub *Sprint Backlog* pipeline and move to the *In Progress* pipeline. 

When there is a pull request in review for an *In Progress* item, the item is moved to the *QA/Review* pipeline. 

If rejected, the item returns to *In Progress*; otherwise, it is deployed in Dev for verification and moves to *Done* pipeline.

Items that are *Done* are moved to the *Closed* pipeline when verified in Dev or Integration. 

> During Sprints, **Technical Architecture** MAY schedule Scrums on a regular cadence for the DCP Development Team *"to identify if any integration issues exist."* (See *Daily Scrum* in [**Scrum Nexus**](http://scrumorg-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/drupal/2018-01/2018-Nexus-Guide-English_0.pdf) for guidance)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During Sprints, the Architecture Team MAY schedule Scrums on a regular cadence for the DCP Development Team *"to identify if any integration issues exist."* (See *Daily Scrum* in [**Scrum Nexus**](http://scrumorg-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/drupal/2018-01/2018-Nexus-Guide-English_0.pdf) for guidance)
```

**PM** monitors progress using ZenHub charts and reports.

### Sprint Review

> **Every four weeks**. On the penultimate day of the Sprint, there is a one hour meeting for the Sprint Review open to the entire DCP commmunity led by **PM**. Major product increments selected by **Technical Leads** are demonstrated to key stakeholders.

Reviewer 6: This meeting will have to be strictly time-boxed. One hour is not much time if there are more than about 4-5 things to demo.  I know that we haven't had much to demo lately but we are all hoping that this changes.  We can always modify this to be 1.5 hours in the future.

Author: Noted. I think this could easily be addressed during the Retrospective process? Also - that's why I stressed _major product increments_ - not ever feature requires a demo.

 
### Sprint Retrospective

**Every four weeks**. On the final day of the Sprint, there is a one hour meeting for the Sprint Retrospective open to the entire DCP commmunity led by **PM**.
 
The Scrum Retrospective identifies opportunities to improve the planning process in future iterations. 

(See *Sprint Retrospective* in [*Scrum Guide*](https://scrumguides.org/docs/scrumguide/v2017/2017-Scrum-Guide-US.pdf) and *Nexus Sprint Retrospective* in [*Nexus Guide*](http://scrumorg-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/drupal/2018-01/2018-Nexus-Guide-English_0.pdf) for additional details.)

### Acceptance Criteria

This process will be under continuous community introspection and improvement through the Sprint Retrospective. If the process fails to deliver product increments with high confidence after three Sprints, then more radical alternatives should be pursued that satisfy the requirements from our key stakeholders in HCA Science Governance.

### Unresolved Questions

This RFC proposes specific weekdays to start (Thursday) and end (Wednesday) Sprints, but we may need to use a doodle poll to reach consensus. Monday is best avoided due to the number of holidays. 

> #### Requested Guidance from Technical Architecture

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Requested Guidance from the Architecture Team
```

> - What is the recommended *interpretation* of story points for DCP developers? What does "1" mean? Consider [Engineering Estimates](https://producthabits.com/engineering-estimates/) as an example.

Reviewer 3: Suggest story points are relative estimates of effort. Story point velocity would be measured after a few sprints. But I accept actual time estimates are usually inaccurate and misleading, so suggest de-emphasizing their relationship to real time.

Author: My perspective is that this should be a Technical Architecture decision. T-shirt sizing is a relative estimate of effort but would still require a standard mapping to the Fibonacci sequence offered by ZenHub story points. I agree that time estimates can be challenging.

Developing the t-shirt sizing example, there should be guidance from Technical Architecture on how many _small_ or _medium_ items could be addressed in a Sprint.

Reviewer 5: As an aside you can add any number as a custom zenhub story point, so it doesn't have to be Fibonacci.

## Summary

This RFC adopts and formalizes existing best project management practices and applications from the DCP community to define one process for planning and delivering product increments of the DCP *data as a service* on a regular cadence.

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED" "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, [RFC2119](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt), and [RFC8174](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174.txt) when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

## Author(s)

 [Trevor Heathorn](mailto:theathor@ucsc.edu)
 
 [Brian Raymor](mailto:brianraymor@chanzuckerberg.com)

## Shepherd

[TBD](mailto:username@example.com)

## Motivation

***[Note - remove if approved]***
*Early versions of this RFC were socialized with the DCP community during a PM call and at the DCP meeting in February 2019* 

One of the **challenges** facing the DCP as it matures was identified in this [Update from HCA Science Governance](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/13hZ7vmr371mN1YFjFyDN-6c0Ul95NwiJcVsjA3nJFVE/edit#slide=id.p3):

> > "A lack of reproducible planning process that prioritizes deliverables and ensures confidence that they will meet the needs of HCA"

Reviewer 7: What does 'reproducible' mean here?

Author: "reproducible" means that we can _turn the crank_ on a regular cadence - that there is a repeatable planning/execution process that enables DCP to generate quarterly releases with high-confidence based on a prioritized roadmap. One of the **Immediate Goals** recently communicated from Oversight to DCP PM:

>Establish a quarterly release cycle (both data and software) and align efforts across DCP development

Author: @diekhans - **Tiger teams** (_balancing developer resources across boxes_) is outside the scope of this RFC. Our inability to move resources between components/institutions based on DCP priorities has been communicated to some members of Oversight as impacting our agility. 

Your conclusion:

>Perhaps because I am not a PM, I am not seeing how this proposal helps to accelerate the delivery of features

Within the current proposal, this is addressed by:
1. Prioritizing DCP features. If AUDR is Pri 0, then _all hands on deck_! Currently, everything is equally important which means that community members may be unsure whether to focus on Feature A or Feature B or Feature C. They may end up poorly time slicing between both. (And the nascent roadmap process should guide prioritization in the future)
2. Assigning a shepherd to each DCP Feature to help align component teams and drive progress.

**4 Week Sprints** - Our motivations:

1. Scrum _ceremonies_ require valuable meeting time (within a small time window) on a regular cadence which is especially difficult to schedule for our geographically distributed teams. We'd prefer to pay that cost every four weeks instead of every two weeks. 
2. We want to encourage the use of _Spikes_ to thoughtfully explore/prototype complex problems and avoid your scenario where component Foo discovers an unknown dependency on component Bar in the middle of a Sprint. But Sprints can also be cancelled per the Scrum process. For example, a more realistic scenario might be the Metadata user experience during Beta. If we had started a Sprint and received this feedback, then we may have cancelled the Sprint and refocused our Sprint Goal.

And there's a great deal of literature on the **best** duration of Sprints.

Reviewer 8: @brianraymor, can you go into more detail on the process around cancelled sprints? 
My concern is if we cancelled a sprint each time we realized we need to add in a ticket, it would be very difficult to get through a complete 4-week sprint. 

In the scenario you mentioned above, could component Bar replace an item in their sprint to make room for the urgent dependency?

Author: @samanehsan - Please see **Cancelling a Sprint** in the [Scrum Guide](https://scrumguides.org/docs/scrumguide/v2017/2017-Scrum-Guide-US.pdf). It's an extreme and unusual action. I believe that we would have cancelled a Sprint to respond to the Metadata feedback during Beta for example. 

> My concern is if we cancelled a sprint each time we realized we need to add in a ticket

You can **add** tickets per Scrum:

*As new work is required, the Development Team adds it to the Sprint Backlog. As work is performed or completed, the estimated remaining work is updated. When elements of the plan are deemed unnecessary, they are removed. Only the Development Team can change its Sprint Backlog during a Sprint.*

> In the scenario you mentioned above, could component Bar replace an item in their sprint to make room for the urgent dependency?

It depends.

It's had to discuss in the abstract. Let's be concrete:

0. Sprint starts.
1. Component Foo is blocked on a change by Component Bar in the Sprint Backlog for a DCP priority.
2. Component Baz suddenly discovers an urgent dependency on Component Bar.
3. Component Bar cannot do both.
3a. If the urgent dependency is **not** related to a DCP priority, then it's declined unless Component Baz has buffer to do the work.
3b. If the urgent dependency is related to a DCP priority, then this would need to be surfaced to the Product Owners for a decision. It would also need to be discussed during the Retrospective to understand why the urgent dependency was not understood. We're encouraging Spikes for research and prototypes. 

Another scenario:
0. Sprint starts.
1. The Sprint Backlog for Component Bar contains no DCP priorities. It's all internal items.
2. Component Baz suddenly discovers an urgent dependency on Component Bar.
3a. If the urgent dependency is **not** related to a DCP priority, then the Component Bar Team should make the decision.
3b. If the urgent dependency is related to a DCP priority, then this would need to be surfaced to the Product Owners for a decision. It would also need to be discussed during the Retrospective to understand why the urgent dependency was not understood. We're encouraging Spikes for research and prototypes. 

Part of the problem with the abstract cases is related to estimation. You're potentially going to lose Sprinting time performing costing unless the dependency is well-understood - and if it was well-understood then why wasn't it surfaced earlier? Depending on when the urgent dependency was discovered, you could be two weeks into the Sprint already.  Perhaps a rule of thumb could be - no urgent dependencies considered after Week N of a Sprint. We want to encourage good habits. 

There are [multiple strategies](https://medium.com/agilelab/strategies-for-handling-unplanned-work-during-sprint-2f89697509ff) for managing such cases that we should consider.

Reviewer 7: re: cancelling a sprint, we are chronically short of meeting rooms at the EBI right now. Depending on the number of people who need to be involved (hence size of meeting room) it will be pretty difficult for us to shift the sprint window once established. Not saying this is a blocker to cancellations but one should bear it in mind.

### DCP _data as a service_

As a starting point, DCP should think *outside-the-box* and adopt one of the [principles of LeSS](https://less.works/less/principles/whole-product-focus.html) 
>"Customers don’t buy a part of the product, but the whole product … there is no value in separate parts or half-working parts."

> Historically, ownership of the DCP software has been distributed across our canonical architectural diagram with its colorful *think-inside-the-boxes* (components). As a result, DCP planning and development have also been distributed to a high degree, resulting in questions or confusion about DCP priorities relative to component priorities with a subsequent lack of alignment for delivery of product increments, unless externally imposed by requests from HCA Science Governance. 

Reviewer 7: Are you proposing to align development on practically all items (including those internal to teams) or only on cross-component issues?

Author: We're **not** proposing alignment on _practically all items (including those internal to teams)_. 

This is part of the reason that Sprint Planning is distributed rather than centralized. The proposal is that component teams prioritize their Sprint Backlog during their Sprint Planning based on DCP priorities reviewed during Refinement which may be cross-component epics, _significant features_, or DevSecOps requirements for a release.

The intent is to encourage conversations about priorities such as "My team cannot contribute to this DCP priority in the next Sprint _because ..._ or My team can only contribute 40% to this DCP priority in the next Sprint _because ..._

> For example, how does a developer know whether to prioritize research for an operational scoping task assigned by the [**Architecture Team**](https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/dcp-community/blob/master/charters/Architecture/charter.md), collaborate on a cross-component RFC surfaced at a DCP quarterly meeting, or develop a component-specific feature? 

Reviewer 7: This is an excellent point. RFCs, for instance, are necessary but reviewing them takes significant amounts of time that pushes out other work.

To best serve our users and address the concerns of HCA Science Governance, our plans must focus on the needs and priorities of DCP *data as a service* rather than the individual *Chartreuse* or *Polka Dot* components. This requires a DCP-wide project management process with clear priorities and product increments delivered on a regular cadence. 

## Scientific "guardrails" 

As key stakeholders, the *Oversight Committee* MUST attend Sprint Reviews on a quarterly basis to offer feedback. 

## Detailed Design or _Scrum meets ZenHub_

### **!** Scrum

> A single agile framework (referenced as **!** **Scrum**) MUST be used by all component teams for planning and developing DCP *data as a service* in an iterative, incremental manner.

Reviewer 7: If followed, this will stop component development teams to use a methodology suited to their local circumstance. In ingest, for instance, it is rapidly becoming clear to me that we would be much better operating under Kanban than agile (and to some extent this is what already happens). We have to deal with continuous arising issues (devops, security, tight feedback loop bugs, etc.) and agile does not work at all well for this.. I realize removing this flexibility is being done on purpose but it will not work for ingest in an effective manner.

Author: I would not expect devops and security issues to be emerging continuously - if you're referring to the General Availability DevSecOps requirements. Sam Pierson is currently _rationalizing_ the ZenHub board for those cases, so we can effectively prioritize and schedule these tasks in future Sprints. With regards to _tight feedback loop bugs_ - do you currently buffer a percentage of each Sprint to manage such cases?

I think you meant _we could be much better operating under Kanban than ~agile~ Scrum_? I'm certainly willing to explore other agile (or even waterfall) approaches if there is community consensus. Scrum was selected based on its broad adoption across DCP.  I'm much less familiar with Kanban or its [variations](https://www.atlassian.com/agile/kanban/kanplan) beyond a high-level conceptual overview. Can you outline how it might work across DCP? I have no _ideology_ related to frameworks or applications - just that the DCP  adopts one approach that highlights dependencies, provides tracking and visibility, and addresses the requirements from _Oversight_ for a high-confidence, reproducible process.

Reviewer 7: Devops and security issues do emerge continuously. Just to give 2 examples - 1) a recent security issue with the base images used in the ingest component deployment requiring upgrade. This in turn revealed significant problems with our upgrade process that we are still looking at weeks later, because we keep having to deal with other emerging tasks. And 2) a recent accidental commit of an access key by an ingest dev. This required remediation, investigation and reporting by many people.

I'll also give a few ongoing examples in different categories. 1) Ingestion of Tabula Muris in production. This process failed with 300+ missing bundles. About 100 seem to be upload errors and another 100 data store. But the others are unaccounted for in ingest. We need to do prioritized investigation and remediation to unblock the data flow. 2) In the latest scale test 36 primary bundles are missing and this needs investigation/remediation.

None of these tasks could be predicted and all require immediate or near-immediate attention. In my experience, a Kanban approach is better so that we are properly accounting for these emerging issues at an immediate local level. I also need control of my own Zenhub board for all work items to manage our local team.

The needs of other teams may be different - for instance they will not face the continuous operational ingest issues that we do. I fully agree with the need to align activities and priorities at a cross-component level but I'm very doubtful that a one-size-fits-all approach will work across institutions with their own cultures and leadership in different timezones and with no ability to move developers between components.

Since journeys may vary per persona, personas MUST be identified for an epic by assigning a standard GitHub label such as "keyboard", "pipette", or "road-builder".  An epic MAY support multiple personas.

#### Technical and Operational Requirements
Product-wide technical or operational requirements are defined by the **Architecture Team** and modeled as epics in the *dcp* repo.

#### Owners

A DCP owner MUST be assigned to each issue or epic in the *Product Backlog* in the *dcp* repo to shepherd and coordinate progress. This owner is responsible for ensuring that related issues are created in component repo(s) and linked to epics in the *dcp* repo.

For example, an implementation task for a specific component resides in its own repo and is linked to the relevant epic in the *dcp* repo.

* No component-specific GitHub labels such as "Data Store" MUST be assigned to an epic in the *dcp* repo. The link documents the relationship.

### Sprints

>  **Four week sprints**. There MUST be one DCP Sprint and Sprint Backlog, not a separate Sprint and Sprint Backlog for each component team. Each DCP Sprint starts on Thursday and ends on Wednesday.  

Reviewer 7: I find it hard to agree with a 4 week iteration. This will exacerbate the existing issues ingest has with its 2 week sprints of continuously emerging issues.

Author: Please see the rationale in my [response](https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/dcp-community/pull/69#discussion_r264930802) to Mark. We can certainly adjust the duration based on experience during Retrospectives.

 
Each Sprint MUST be assigned a ZenHub *Milestone* with a due date set by the **Product Owners**.

 All Scrum events are scheduled on the DCP calendar at a regular cadence. For example:
![](../images/0000-scrum-calendar.png)

### Refinement

> **Every two weeks**. There is a one hour meeting for **Product Owners**, **UXR**, and **Technical Leads** to collaborate on adding detail, owners, and order (but not estimates) to the items in the _dcp_ repo *Product Backlog* to reflect DCP priorities and address emerging issues. Dependencies between components are also clearly identified. (Refinement may also occur during the Sprint Review.)

Reviewer 7: I can't see that 1 hour every 2 weeks would be anywhere near enough. We can spend more than half an hour just discussing a single issue within techarch.

Author: How much time would you propose then? Originally, we recommended 2 hours every 2 weeks.

Reviewer 7: I guess it depends on the level of detail. So I'm happy with suck it and see.

Reviewer: In my experience, these meetings go well if there's substantial prep work to make sure that the board is close to what it should be. If we acknowledge this and continuously assign AIs to refine tickets before the meeting, the refinement meeting will have a higher chance of success.

#### Refinement and ZenHub Pipelines

New items in the *dcp* repo appear in the ZenHub *New* pipeline and MUST be triaged into the *Product Backlog* pipeline, the *Icebox* pipeline, or the *Closed* pipeline.

The ZenHub *Product Backlog* pipeline is the top-level DCP product backlog which is ordered during Refinement.

The ZenHub *Icebox* pipeline SHOULD be used with great constraint in the *dcp* repo. It's not a pipeline for avoiding hard decisions during Refinement. It's intended to document potential *futures* from the DCP roadmap. Individual component repo(s) MAY use the *Icebox* pipeline in a manner of their own choosing.

No issues in the *dcp* repo MUST be assigned to the *Epic* pipeline. Individual component repo(s) MAY use the *Epic* pipeline in a manner of their own choosing.

### Sprint Planning

Prior to the start of the DCP Sprint, component teams MUST identify their *Sprint Backlog* - a slice of items from the the ZenHub *Product Backlog* pipeline in their repo which are assigned to the ZenHub Milestone for the Sprint and moved to the ZenHub *Sprint Backlog* pipeline.

The number of items selected is solely up to the Development Team. 

> - [ZenHub story points](https://help.zenhub.com/support/solutions/articles/43000034282) MUST be assigned to all *Sprint Backlog* items. (Story points are required to enable [ZenHub burndown charts](https://help.zenhub.com/support/solutions/articles/43000010356-track-sprint-progress-with-burndown-charts) to track the progress of a Sprint.)

Reviewer 7: As far as I know, there is no way to calibrate story points among development teams unless those teams are in continuous communication and they have considerable practice in sizing identical stories. I can't see this being feasible with the time zone different to ingest and limited opportunities for communication.

Author: I [clarified](https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/dcp-community/pull/69#discussion_r262616783) this in the similar thread below. 

* Component teams are required to estimate their own Sprint Backlog. Currently, each team may use their own interpretation of story points. The goal is to track and improve velocity sprint-by-sprint. 

* There is an open question in the RFC for the Architecture Team about whether there is any benefit in defining a standard model for story points. For example - the way that my Dev Lead in Windows costed features for milestones was based on rough t-shirt sizing - per _average_ Dev, you could fit one **L**, two **M**, or four **XS** in a milestone. (Further refinement occurred later in the cycle) We could certainly map story points to t-shirt sizes. See [Engineering Estimates](https://producthabits.com/engineering-estimates/). If implemented, the component team would be responsible for assessing the t-shirt size for each item in their Sprint Backlog and assigning the standard story points for that size.

> - [ZenHub story points](https://help.zenhub.com/support/solutions/articles/43000034282) MUST be assigned to all *Sprint Backlog* items. (Story points are required to enable [ZenHub burndown charts](https://help.zenhub.com/support/solutions/articles/43000010356-track-sprint-progress-with-burndown-charts) to track the progress of a Sprint.)

Reviewer 7: I find it hard to see how story point estimates will be useful at this level since the levels of uncertainty around any estimates will be very high.

Author: What do you mean by _this level_? These are story points assigned by you to issues in your own repo for the next Sprint.

Reviewer 7: I misunderstood the scope of your text above - I was thinking of a planning level above individual items but I see that's not what you are talking about. However, I'll make 2 points. 1) As above, emerging items would need the whole team to assess the story points, which isn't feasible in the time we have available and I'm not 100% sure of the value. And 2) even locally when we try to drill down our local story point estimations are usually very inaccurate. I believe this is partly due to inexperience estimating but mostly due to the complexity of the domain where our understanding of what we need to do is constantly changing and often only emerges when we try to do it.

Author: 1) For the moment, we're **not** going to estimate story points for DCP-level issues. In the future, we may need rough t-shirt sizing for quarterly roadmaps but I'd defer that discussion to the future Roadmap RFC that the Project Leads are iterating on.
2) Use spikes to reduce complexity. Introspect during Daily Scrum / Team Retrospectives about why estimates are _off_.  We want to use this process to build the muscle - not shame anyone.

  - [How to start?](https://www.scrum.org/forum/scrum-forum/6774/how-decide-how-many-story-points-take-first-sprint)
- Research and prototyping tasks SHOULD be modeled as Spikes.
- Dependencies between components within a Sprint MUST be communicated between the respective teams and surfaced using [ZenHub Dependencies](https://help.zenhub.com/support/solutions/articles/43000010349). 

At the start of the Sprint, the single DCP Sprint Backlog SHOULD be reviewed by the **PM Team** and **Architecture Team** in their oversight roles.

### Sprint(ing)

> During Development, individual developers assign items from the ZenHub *Sprint Backlog* pipeline and move to the *In Progress* pipeline. 

Reviewer 7: This is not the way the EBI structure works where the team lead assigns items.

Author: Be happy to be less prescriptive - rephrase to _During Development, the Development Team assigns items from the ZenHub **Sprint Backlog** ..._?

Reviewer 7: Sure

Author: Addressed in editor's draft.

When there is a pull request in review for an *In Progress* item, the item is moved to the *QA/Review* pipeline. 

If rejected, the item returns to *In Progress*; otherwise, it is deployed in Dev for verification and moves to the *Done* pipeline.

> Items that are *Done* are moved to the *Closed* pipeline when verified in Dev or Integration. 

Reviewer 9: I propose an extension to that. Consider adding the ~following~ Integrated, Staged and Deployed pipelines to Zenhub. To summarize the semantics:

* [Preceding pipelines as currently specified in this RFC]
* In Progress — PR in the works
* Review — PR filed and review requested
* Merged — PR approved and merged to default branch (develop or master for most repos) and deployed to component's `dev` deployment
* Integrated — Changes promoted to `integration` deployment
* Staged — Changes promoted to `staging` deployment
* Deployed — Changes promoted to `prod` deployment
* Closed — Changes (feature or bug) verified by original author in production

This makes it very easy to tell at a glance how far a particular change has progressed through the promotion sequence. It makes it easy for ticket stake holders to examine the effect of a change in deployments preceding production.

Author: If there is consensus among your peer Technical Leads to extend the pipelines for better transparency on the sequence, then I'm happy to make the change. It does require more developer discipline to succeed.

Reviewer 9: We could specify that teams SHOULD makes use of it but MAY skip pipelines and go directly from Review to Closed. There are ticket types that don't manifest in code changes. We label them as `task` in our repo. These task tickets should go directly from in Progress to Closed.

Reviewer 9: What are the next steps to get this into the draft? I don't think we should be doing a mini-RFC process on this proposal. If the author doesn't disagree, they should work it in, resolve the comment and the usual "silence is consent" approach should apply.

Author: @hannes-ucsc - Not based on my experience as a technical editor and author at the IETF. You wait during the time-boxed review period to see if there's rough consensus supporting a change. I'd like to hear from other leads on this one before making the change.

Author: Also - I prefer to avoid *SHOULD* because it's often an easy way to add complexity to a design for one requestor and avoid a consensus conversation because everyone who disagrees knows that they can safely ignore it.

Reviewer 9: Where exactly do you see the added complexity in allowing ticket to bypass the new  pipelines I proposed? In fact, I think making them mandatory adds complexity for things like tasks where the added pipelines don't make sense.

Reviewer 9: Regarding process: Assuming we resolve the SHOULD/MUST issue, is it your intention to merge this unless you hear dissent from other leads?

Reviewer 7: I think having integrated, staged and deployed pipelines could be good. I'm often confused as to the progress through environments of a particular feature. But @hannes-ucsc, don't 'In Progress', 'Review' and 'Merged' already all exist just with slightly different names?

Reviewer 9: Correct, @justincc. I edited my comment.

Author: @hannes-ucsc - See my proposed changes below. I suggest that we use the names of the stages from the SOP ("Production" rather than "Deployed") to match the documentation which I've now referenced in the RFC.

During Development, the Development Team assigns issues from the ZenHub *Sprint Backlog* pipeline and move to the *In Progress* pipeline. 

When there is a pull request filed and in review for an *In Progress* item, the issue is moved to the *Review* pipeline. 

If the pull request is rejected, the issue returns to *In Progress*.

Otherwise, the pipeline tracks the issue through the DCP [promotion sequence](https://allspark.dev.data.humancellatlas.org/dcp-ops/docs/wikis/SOP:%20Releasing%20new%20Versions%20of%20DCP%20Software).

The approved pull request is merged to the default branch, deployed to Development, and the issue moves to the *Development* pipeline.

When the changes are promoted to Integration, the issue moves to the *Integration* pipeline.

When the changes are promoted to Staging, the issue moves to the *Staging* pipeline.

When the changes are promoted to Production, the issue moves to the *Production* pipeline.

When the original author verifies the changes in Production, the issue then moves to the *Closed* pipeline.

Reviewer 9: I'm fine with the name changes. The Development pipeline may be confused with the In Progress pipeline. In my team, there is a little bit of a delay between when a PR is merged into the default branch and the time the default branch is deployed to our `dev` environment. But we can deal with that wrinkle with more automation or labels.

Reviewer 7: There are other reasons to have tasks in review. For example, when we complete an ingest feature we need wranglers to review it before we can consider it done.

During Sprints, the **Architecture Team** MAY schedule Scrums on a regular cadence for the DCP Development Team *"to identify if any integration issues exist."* (See *Daily Scrum* in [*Scrum Nexus*](http://scrumorg-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/drupal/2018-01/2018-Nexus-Guide-English_0.pdf) for guidance)

> THe **PM Team** monitors progress using ZenHub charts and reports.

Author: _THe_ -> _The_ - corrected in editor's draft.

### Sprint Review

**Every four weeks**. On the penultimate day of the Sprint, there is a one hour meeting for the Sprint Review open to the entire DCP commmunity led by the **PM Team**. Major product increments selected by **Technical Leads** are demonstrated to key stakeholders.

(See *Sprint Review* in [*Scrum Guide*](https://scrumguides.org/docs/scrumguide/v2017/2017-Scrum-Guide-US.pdf) and *Nexus Sprint Review* in [*Nexus Guide*](http://scrumorg-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/drupal/2018-01/2018-Nexus-Guide-English_0.pdf) for guidance.)
 
### Sprint Retrospective

**Every four weeks**. On the final day of the Sprint, there is a one hour meeting for the Sprint Retrospective open to the entire DCP commmunity led by the **PM Team**.
 
The Scrum Retrospective identifies opportunities to improve the planning process in future iterations. 

(See *Sprint Retrospective* in [*Scrum Guide*](https://scrumguides.org/docs/scrumguide/v2017/2017-Scrum-Guide-US.pdf) and *Nexus Sprint Retrospective* in [*Nexus Guide*](http://scrumorg-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/drupal/2018-01/2018-Nexus-Guide-English_0.pdf) for guidance.)

### Acceptance Criteria

> This process will be under continuous community introspection and improvement through the Sprint Retrospective. If the process fails to deliver product increments with high confidence after three Sprints, then more radical alternatives should be pursued that satisfy the requirements from our key stakeholders in HCA Science Governance. We should also assess whether ZenHub is meeting our needs for a common project management application. 

Reviewer 7: What metrics do you propose to measure delivery?

Author: 1. There is small set of DCP-level priorities that we're all aligned to. There is less distraction and time-slicing required due to "all features that are important to someone are equal and must now be simultaneously designed".  For example, if DCP Pri 0 is _Awesome Metadata Consumer_ solution, then our attention is on _Awesome Metadata Consumer_ solution and not on Favorite-Feature-A and Favorite-Feature-B. In the absence of quarterly roadmaps, this will be a challenging conversation at first.
2. Teams are having more open conversations about their struggles balancing DCP-level priorities with their DCP-component priorities.
3. Estimation is improving. We have high(er) confidence in our ability to deliver on a quarterly basis as desired by _Oversight_.  This requires teams to be more introspective to be successful. 
4. The planning process is responsive to spontaneous and Retrospective feedback. 

We could also gauge community satisfaction with a survey.

Reviewer 2: It's difficult to determine metrics to measure the success of a process in the absence of a baseline. We could look at some metrics before, during (M1, M2, M3) and after adoption of the process. As @brianraymor suggests a community satisfaction survey before and after seems like a great idea (at least for points 1 and 2 above). Some of the metrics we look at may be more anecdotal rather than empirical. 

What value are we trying to deliver with this process?
a) Increased alignment and coordination. How do we measure we have achieved this? Survey?
b) Increased velocity in delivering DCP wide priority features. It's not a success of the process to deliver product increments,  we would need to measure if were doing better than before. Again, this measure may be anecdotal without a baseline.
c) Deeper sense of investment and engagement throughout the DCP. Survey?
d) Ability to innovate, course correct and focus on delivery of a particular feature. Similar to point 1 above.

The number of items selected is solely up to the Development Team. 
- [ZenHub story points](https://help.zenhub.com/support/solutions/articles/43000034282) MUST be assigned to all *Sprint Backlog* items. (Story points are required to enable [ZenHub burndown charts](https://help.zenhub.com/support/solutions/articles/43000010356-track-sprint-progress-with-burndown-charts) to track the progress of a Sprint.)
  - [How to start?](https://www.scrum.org/forum/scrum-forum/6774/how-decide-how-many-story-points-take-first-sprint)
- Research and prototyping tasks SHOULD be modeled as Spikes.
- Dependencies between components within a Sprint MUST be communicated between the respective teams and surfaced using [ZenHub Dependencies](https://help.zenhub.com/support/solutions/articles/43000010349). 

At the start of the Sprint, the single DCP Sprint Backlog SHOULD be reviewed by the **PM Team** and **Architecture Team** in their oversight roles.

### Sprint(ing)

> During Development, the Development Team assigns issues from the ZenHub *Sprint Backlog* pipeline and move to the *In Progress* pipeline. 

Reviewer 9: The use of "Development" here …

Author: Easy change - _During Development_ -> _During the Sprint_ to avoid the collision below.

Reviewer 9: There are two occurrences of that word in the sentence.

When a pull request is filed and in review for an *In Progress* item, the issue is moved to the *Review* pipeline. 

If the pull request is rejected, the issue returns to *In Progress*.

Otherwise, the pipeline tracks the issue through the DCP [promotion sequence](https://allspark.dev.data.humancellatlas.org/dcp-ops/docs/wikis/SOP:%20Releasing%20new%20Versions%20of%20DCP%20Software).

> The approved pull request is merged to the default branch, deployed to Development, and the issue moves to the *Development* pipeline.

Reviewer 9: … collides with its use here. No one calls the `dev` deployment `Development`. I don't have a solution other than using the names I originally proposed: `Merged`, `Integrated`, `Staged` and `Done`. I still prefer those.

Reviewer 9: I understand the urge to name the added pipelines after the deployments, but we have been using inconsistent terminology for those, e.g. `prod` vs `production`.  I find it more sound to name the pipelines by the intent *behind* each deployment. The intent behind the `integration` deployment is to integrate changes with other components. The intent behind the `staging` deployment is to stage changes for the final push to production.

When the changes are promoted to Integration, the issue moves to the *Integration* pipeline.

When the changes are promoted to Staging, the issue moves to the *Staging* pipeline.

When the changes are promoted to Production, the issue moves to the *Production* pipeline.

> 

Reviewer 3: This creates a lot of (manual) overhead to move whole batches of issues from Dev to Integration to Staging to Production as each promotion occurs. Also a sprint can't be closed until all issues in the sprint are closed, which could be weeks (or months) later. Perhaps issues could be verified/closed in Dev (as now) and what's deployed in Integration, Staging and Production could be tracked via the sofware version numbers deployed there - someone looking at a particular issue could see what software release it is in and compare with the software releases in the various environments to see where it has bene deployed so far.

Reviewer 7: Regarding sprint closing, I think this could be one of those examples where we are trying to bend to a process rather than what's useful on a development level.
